# Smart Contract Development

Neo stands out from other blockchains in that it allows you to implement smart contracts in several well known
programming languages like C#, Go and JavaScript. Neow3j contributes to this and adds support for Java as a smart
contract language. The part of neow3j concerned with smart contract development is termed **neow3j devpack**. 
It is composed of three modules.

- The `io.neow3j:devpack` is the module that your smart contract project will depend on. It is a Java library that
  contains Neo-specific annotations, methods, and classes required for contract development. You will use it in your
  contract, e.g., to fetch information about the current block, or to send out a notification.  
- The `io.neow3j:compiler` contains the compiler that produces NeoVm code from Java classes. You can use it 
  programmatically, by invoking it in a Java program, but, most likely you will not need to access it directly.
- The `io.neow3j:gradle-plugin` implements a Gradle plugin that you apply to your smart contract project and offers a
  simple Gradle task for contract compilation

It is important to understand that, even though, on the surface you will be writing Java code, the generated bytecode 
and the executing virtual machine are not related to Java. Your smart contract code is compiled to byte code that runs
on the Neo Virtual Machine (NeoVM) and not on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). Because of the differences between the JVM
and the NeoVM, the programming experience with Java for Neo is different. We, therefore, define Java for Neo as a Java
flavour and name it **Neow3Java**.

The documentation on smart contract development is divided into the following sections:

- If you are new to smart contracts, start with the [Setup](neo-n3/smart_contract_development/setup.md). It will guide you
  through the basic **setup, implemtation, and compilation of a simple contract**.

- The principles and differences of developing in **Neow3Java versus Java** are documented in the section 
  [Neow3Java](neo-n3/smart_contract_development/neow3java.md).

- A detailed documentation on the **devpack's API** can be found in the 
  [Devpack](neo-n3/smart_contract_development/devpack.md) section.

- The possibilities of how to **compile a smart contract** are documented in the 
  [Compilation](neo-n3/smart_contract_development/compilation.md) section.

- For information on **debugging** go to the [Debugging](neo-n3/smart_contract_development/debugging.md) section.

- For information on **contract deployment** check out the [Deployment](neo-n3/smart_contract_development/deployment.md)
  section. 

- More **smart contract examples** can be found in the [neow3j-examples](https://github.com/neow3j/neow3j-examples-java)
  repository.
